[WIP]doc: osd migration design (#12381)
rook/rook: design/ceph/osd-migration.md

  2. If the PG status is not `active+clean`, cancel the osd replace operation and reconcile the operator.
  3. Once the PG status is `active+clean`, delete a single OSD from the `OSDDeleteList`. Refer the deletion process mentioned below.
  4. Continue with the existing flow of creating and upgrading the OSD, with the exception of skipping the upgrade for all the OSDs that are currently present in the `OSDDeleteList`. Skipping update operation on the OSDs that need to be migrated is important because with OSDs on disks, the OSD prepared pod is updated if there is an update in the spec. This will update the osd store to `bluestore-rdr` in the spec without migrating the OSD. This will cause errors.
  5. Once the OSD is added back, reconcile the operator again to continue replacing the other OSDs by following the same steps mentioned above.

#### DELETE OSD
OSD can be deleted by using the following options:

##### OSD PURGE JOB
- Stop the OSD pod by patching the OSD deployment with `replica=0`
- Mark the OSD as `down`

> - Once the OSD is `down`, run the OSD purge job to forcefully delete the OSD. No need to check if the OSD `safe-to-destroy`

Reviewer: Still need to update this section since no purge job is used, right?

Author: I've update the design doc.

Author: marking as resolved.

## GOALS
- Newly provisioned clusters should be able to use the specific storage backend while creating OSDs.
- Existing clusters should be able to upgrade the OSDs to use a specific storage backend, with a minimal downtime and without losing their data.

## PROPOSAL
- Add a new field called `spec.Storage.osdStore` in the ceph cluster yaml.
- This will contain:
  - `spec.Storage.osdStore.type`: The type of backend store to be used for OSDs. For example, bluestore, bluestore_rdr, etc. The default store type will be `bluestore`
  - `spec.Storage.osdStore.updateStore`: Whether the user wants to migrate the existing OSDs to use new storage backend. The migration process will involve destroying the exsisting OSDs one by one, wiping the disks, creating a new OSD and waiting for the PGs to be active+clean before migrating the next OSD. Since this operation involves possible downtime, users should be really sure before proceeding with this action. This field can only take the value as `yes-really-update-store`
  -

- Example:
```yaml
storage:
  osdStore:
    type: bluestore_rdr

>     updateStore: yes-really-update-store

Author: what will be impact of supporting changing to the previous backend store, say from `bluestore_rdr` to `bluestore`?
Since we are creating new OSDs, I can't see why should not support this. Since the bluestore_rdr is new and might have issues, the user might back to switch back to the previous store.  What do you think?

>     updateStore: yes-really-update-store

Author: ceph won't support this.

```

- New deployments will use this `osdStore.type` while creating the OSDs.
- If the user wants to change the `osdStore.type` field for an existing cluster, then they need to provide `spec.Storage.osdStore.updateStore:yes-really-update-store` in order to migrate the existing osds to use update osdStore.

- Add a new label `osd-store:<osd store type>` to all the OSD pods.
- This label will help to identify the current backend store being used for the OSD and enable the operator to decide if the
  OSD should be migrated incase the user changes the backend store type in the spec (`spec.Storage.osdStore.type`).

### NEW CLUSTERS
- Currently the osd backend store is hardcoded to `bluestore` throughout the operator code.

> - Add a new environment variable called `ROOK_OSD_STORE_TYPE` in the OSD prepare and OSD pods. This will contain the OSD store type. Use this environment variable to prepare and activate the cluster.

Author: OSD prepare pod should be enough.  Its needed in the `init` container to `activate`  osd [here](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/aee57ea9ffee36d680954193146d1d66c3953167/pkg/operator/ceph/cluster/osd/spec.go#L119), but that can be read via the cluster spec while creating the init container.

#### OSD Prepare
- `ceph-volume prepare` command should be updated to use backend store provided in the `spec.storage.osdStore`. If no value is provided for `spec.storage.osdStore` then default to `bluestore` backend.

  - **OSD on disks**:
    - RAW MODE
      - `ceph-volume lvm prepare --bluestore_rdr ...`
    - LWM MODE
      - `ceph-volume raw prepare --bluestore_rdr ...`
  - **OSD on PVCs**:
    -

#### OSD Create
- `OSD_STORE_FLAG` should use the value provided in the `spec.storage.osdStore`. If no values are provided by the user, then `OSD_STORE_FLAG` should default to `bluestore`
- `ceph-volume` commands should use the `OSD_STORE_FLAG` while activating the OSDs.
  - **OSD on disks**:
    - RAW MODE

>     `ceph-volume raw activate --device "$DEVICE" --no-systemd --no-tmpfs`

Author: This part is still a bit confusing for me and still talking to ceph team about this to get more answers.  According to what have in rook currently, [no need to pass `OSD_STORE_FLAG` for raw mode.](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/aee57ea9ffee36d680954193146d1d66c3953167/pkg/operator/ceph/cluster/osd/spec.go#L179) as it uses `bluestore` by default. 

I tried passing the flag with raw mode activation step, but it failed. (Didn't check the logs on why it failed)

According to the cep-volume team, 

- the `activate` flow has an auto detection mechanism to check what objectstore was used. 
- From ceph-volume point of view, the only difference between bluestore and bluestore-rdr is that when it does the bluestore --mkfs, you have to pass it the objectstore you want to use.  And is done during the `prepare` command like below: 
``` Running command: /usr/bin/ceph-osd --cluster ceph --osd-objectstore bluestore-rdr --mkfs -i 0 --monmap /var/lib/ceph/osd/ceph-0/activate.monmap --keyfile - --osd-data /var/lib/ceph/osd/ceph-0/ --osd-uuid 23ad4680-5901-4ba5-ba41-a98c7b285192 --setuser ceph --setgroup ceph```

>     `ceph-volume raw activate --device "$DEVICE" --no-systemd --no-tmpfs`

Author: So according to the ceph volume team:
``` Raw mode
 Prepare: pass OSD_STORE flag
 Activate: No need to pass any flag and it will internally find out the objectstore type that was added during prepare. 
 
lvm mode:
 Prepare: pass OSD-STORE flag
 Activate:  Passing the OSD-STORE flag is optional.

>     `ceph-volume raw activate --device "$DEVICE" --no-systemd --no-tmpfs`

Reviewer: Ok great, no need to pass the flag to activate for either raw or lvm mode

    - LVM MODE
    `ceph-volume lvm activate --no-systemd "$OSD_STORE_FLAG" "$OSD_ID" "$OSD_UUID"`

  - **OSD on PVCs**:

### EXISTING CLUSTERS
- After upgrading an existing rook ceph cluster to a version that supports `bluestore-rdr`, users can upgrade the `bluestore` based OSDs to use `bluestore-rdr`
- Backend store of the OSDs can not be overridden, so this update will require the OSDs to be replaced one by one.
- In order to start this osd migration, users need to patch the ceph cluster spec like below:

  - Example:
```yaml
storage:
  osdStore:
    type: <desired-backend-store>

>     updateStore: yes-really-update-store

Reviewer: I still wonder if we need specific flags that indicate the conversion intended. For example, let's say they have these settings:
```yaml
    type: bluestore-rdr
    updateStore: yes-really-update-store
```
Then they update this in the future when seastore exists:
```yaml
    type: seastore
    updateStore: yes-really-update-store
```
We would upgrade to seastore automatically. This does seem acceptable, but also is not as safe as if we had used a specific flag. With a specific flag, if they had the following, no upgrade would proceed since it doesn't indicate to update to seastore:
```yaml
    type: seastore
    updateStore: yes-really-update-to-bluestore-rdr
```
So I feel we do need the specific flag.

Author: Lets discuss more about this in the huddle.

Reviewer: Did we discuss? I don't recall a resolution, but maybe because I was out so much last month. :)

Author: We did but there was no conclusion.

Reviewer: I'm ok leaving it as `yes-really-update-store` instead of something more specific, since we're so careful during the replacement of OSDs one-by-one.

```

- Operator reconciler will perform following sequence of steps to replace an OSD:
  1. List out all the OSDs that need to be replaced. This list will contain OSDs that have `osd-store:<osd store type>` pod label does not match the osd store type provided in `spec.storage.osdStore.type`. Lets call it `OSDDeleteList`.
  2. If the PG status is not `active+clean`, cancel the osd replace operation and reconcile the operator.
  3. Once the PG status is `active+clean`, delete a single OSD from the `OSDDeleteList`. Refer the deletion process mentioned below.
  4. Continue with the existing flow of creating and upgrading the OSD, with the exception of skipping the upgrade for all the OSDs that are currently present in the `OSDDeleteList`.
  5. Once the OSD is added back, reconcile the operator again to continue replacing the other OSDs by following the same steps mentioned above.

#### DELETE OSD
OSD can be deleted by using the following options:

> ##### OSD PURGE JOB

Reviewer: If we purge the OSD it will cause more data movement than if we can directly replace the OSD. Purging will cause the PGs on that OSD to be assigned to other OSDs, so the data will then be backfilled to other OSDs. When the new OSD is created, then PGs would be assigned to it and data would start backfilling to the new OSD in addition to data movement potentially to other OSDs. So if we can immediately wipe the disk and re-provision the same OSD from within the same OSD prepare job, we could avoid the potential double movement of PGs. My thoughts on this flow were in the email, but let's plan on discussing in huddle.

Author: marking as resolved

## Non-Goals/Deferred Features:

Migration of OSDs with following configurations is deferred for now and will be taken up in future:
- OSDs on mixed media setup where metadata (RocksDB+WAL) is placed on higher throughput storage media and application data on lower throughput media.
- Setups with multiple OSDs per disk.

## Proposal

### API Changes
- Add `spec.storage.store` in the ceph cluster yaml.

  ```yaml
  storage:
    store:
      type: bluestore-rdr
      updateStore: yes-really-update-store
  ```

  - `type`: The type of backend store to be used for OSDs. For example, bluestore, bluestore-rdr, etc. The default store type will be `bluestore`
  - `updateStore`: Allows the user to migrate the existing OSDs to use any new storage backend. This field can only take the value as `yes-really-update-store`. If the user wants to change the `store.type` field for an existing cluster, then they will also need to update `spec.storage.store.updateStore` with `yes-really-update-store`

- Add `status.ceph.osd` to the ceph cluster status. This will help convey the overall status of the OSD migration

  ``` yaml
  status:
   ceph:
      osd:

>        count: 8

Reviewer: To keep the status simpler with only critical info, I'd suggest no need for the osd count. They can infer the count from the total of different types.

Author: removed `count`. Also keeping this API change under `status.storage.osd` rather than `status.ceph.osd`, like we discussed in yesterday's huddle.

  8. Once the destroyed OSD pod is added back, delete the configmap.
  9. If there is any error during the OSD migration, then preserve the OSD being replaced in the configmap for next reconcile.
  10. Reconcile the operator and perform as same steps until all the OSDs have migrated to the new backend store.

#### Destroy OSD

OSD prepare pod job will perform OSD deletion using following steps.
- Check for OSD ID environment variable of the OSD to be destroyed.
- Use `ceph volume list` to fetch the OSD path.
- Destroy the OSD using following command:

    ```
    ceph osd destroy <OSD_ID> --yes-i-really-mean-it
    ```

- Wipe the OSD disk. This removes all the data on the device.
- Prepare the OSD with the new store type by using the same OSD ID. This is done by passing the OSD ID as `--osd-id` flag to `ceph-volume` command.

    ```
    ceph-volume lvm prepare --osd-id <OSD_ID> --data <OSD_PATH>
    ```

#### Manage OSD migration status

- OSD migration status will managed by `OSDReplaceConfig` API. This will be stored as the config map. For example:
``` yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:

>   config: '{"osdList":{"osds":[{"id":1,"path":"/mnt/set1-data-1qwdpk","node":"minikube-m03"},{"id":2,"path":"/mnt/set1-data-2c8h9k","node":"minikube-m04"}]},"isPgHealthy":true,"OSDInprogress":{"id":0,"path":"/mnt/set1-data-045k6q","node":"minikube-m02"},"startTimeStamp":"2023-07-18T14:41:33.180909077Z"}'

Reviewer: Is this example out of date? I didn't think the full list of OSDs was needed anymore in the configmap, only the osdInProgress. Similarly, line 90 above may be need updating if we're not storing the list of OSD IDs.

Author: yes it was out of date. Updated now.

- `ceph-volume` commands use the `OSD_STORE_FLAG` while activating the OSDs.

    - RAW MODE
      ```
      ceph-volume raw activate --device "$DEVICE" --no-systemd --no-tmpfs
      ```

    - LVM MODE
      ```
      ceph-volume lvm activate --no-systemd "$OSD_STORE_FLAG" "$OSD_ID" "$OSD_UUID"
      ```

**NOTE**: ceph-volume `activate` command doesn't require `OSD_STORE_FLAG` to be passed as an argument. It auto detects the backend store that was used during the OSD `prepare`

### Existing OSDs

- After upgrading an existing rook ceph cluster to a Ceph version that supports `bluestore-rdr`, users can upgrade the `bluestore` based OSDs to use `bluestore-rdr`
- Backend store of the OSDs can not be overridden, so this update will require the OSDs to be replaced one by one.
- In order to start this osd migration, users need to patch the ceph cluster spec like below:

```yaml
storage:
  store:
    type: bluestore-rdr
    updateStore: yes-really-update-store
```

#### Replace OSD
- Operator reconciler will replace one OSD at a time.
- A config map will be used to store the list of OSDs to be replaced and the OSD being replaced currently.
- OSD replacement steps:

>   1. List out all OSDs where `osd-store:<osd store type>` does not match with `spec.storage.store.type`.

Reviewer: The OSDs from step 1 will only be considered for this transition if the transition is supported, right? For example, if all OSDs are converted to `bluestore_rdr,` then the cluster CR is changed back to `bluestore`, we will just not consider them for upgrade and perhaps log a warning, right?

Author: Yes. Rook won't support converting OSDs from `bluestore-rdr` to `bluestore`.  There is a not above (`Once the OSDs are migrated to a new backend store,...` ) with this mention.

>   1. List out all OSDs where `osd-store:<osd store type>` does not match with `spec.storage.store.type`.

Reviewer: What happens if an OSD deployment was mistakenly deleted? (Not an expected scenario, but a possibility if an admin did something wrong.) In the past, the OSD reconcile would just run the OSD prepare job again and create the same OSD again. Can the OSD prepare job detect the correct store type so we set the correct label on the OSD?

Author: If the pgs are down due to the accidental OSD deployment deletion, then we don't perform any osd replacement for new osd store. 
 
>>In the past, the OSD reconcile would just run the OSD prepare job again and create the same OSD again. Can the OSD prepare job detect the correct store type so we set the correct label on the OSD?

With reference to my comment [here](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/12381#discussion_r1285390723), yes the osd prepare pod should be able to correct store type and set that on OSD deployment.

>   2. These OSDs will not be upgraded before migrating to the new OSD store. This is required because any upgrade operation will update the osd store to `bluestore-rdr` in the OSD deployment spec without migrating the OSD. As a result, the operator will lose track of the OSDs that need migration.

Reviewer: In a previous discussion, we decided to always preserve the store type label on the OSD after an OSD has been created, right? Then we can avoid losing track of which OSDs to migrate because we expect the OSDs to have the correct label.

Author: I missed that [comment](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/12381#discussion_r1279592535).  This can be good idea to implement. But I can't think how we can use a single osd-store label  and migrate the OSDs while preserving that label value.

Author: still checking more on this.

Author: There is way. We don't need to preserve the osd labels as well. OSD prepare pod prepares the OSD and stores the OSDInfo in the config map. This OSDInfo has osd details including the osdStore type. This OSDInfo is used by OSD deployment pod to create the OSDs. 

Currently the OSDStore type is being read from the [environment variable](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/7aaf46e11243b21df4d4f088fc80b949019559b0/pkg/daemon/ceph/osd/volume.go#L863).  We can change this approach and use the actual osd store form ceph-volume output. That is, 

``` Running command: stdbuf -oL ceph-volume --log-path /tmp/ceph-log raw list --format json
2023-08-07 04:48:45.870980 D | cephosd: {
    "0efd66fa-f4e3-47c6-a7d7-cc0b5d5c7144": {
        "ceph_fsid": "53be30b3-5bc8-495b-8eff-8c670e4b7902",
        "device": "/dev/vde",
        "osd_id": 5,
        "osd_uuid": "0efd66fa-f4e3-47c6-a7d7-cc0b5d5c7144",
        "type": "bluestore"
    },
```

This will allow OSDs (yet to be migrated to new store) to upgrade without changing the `osd-store` label on the OSD deployment spec. So users can stop migration at any point of time.

Author: Removed this section from the design: 
```   2. These OSDs will not be upgraded before migrating to the new OSD store. This is required because any upgrade operation will update the osd store to `bluestore-rdr` in the OSD deployment spec without migrating the OSD. As a result, the operator will lose track of the OSDs that need migration.```

  3. If the PG status is not `active+clean`, don't replace any OSD.
  4. If the PG status is `active+clean` but a previous OSD replacement is not completed, then don't replace any new OSD.
  5. If the PG status is `active+clean` and no replacement is in progress, then select an OSD to be replaced from the list.
  6. Delete the OSD deployment.
  7. Create an OSD prepare job with an environment variable of OSD ID to be replaced.
  8. OSD prepare pod will destroy the OSD and prepare it again using the same OSD ID. Refer `Destroy OSD` section below for details.

>   9. Once the destroyed OSD pod is added back, delete the configmap.

Reviewer: If we're deleting the configmap, then we're saying that the OSDInProgress is the only thing we need to persist, right?

Author: yes. We are getting the list of OSDs to replace on every reconcile. So `OSDInProgress` is the only think we need to persist.

- `ceph-volume` commands use the `OSD_STORE_FLAG` while activating the OSDs.

    - RAW MODE
      ```
      ceph-volume raw activate --device "$DEVICE" --no-systemd --no-tmpfs
      ```

    - LVM MODE
      ```
      ceph-volume lvm activate --no-systemd "$OSD_STORE_FLAG" "$OSD_ID" "$OSD_UUID"
      ```

**NOTE**: ceph-volume `activate` command doesn't require `OSD_STORE_FLAG` to be passed as an argument. It auto detects the backend store that was used during the OSD `prepare`

### Existing OSDs

- After upgrading an existing rook ceph cluster to a Ceph version that supports `bluestore-rdr`, users can upgrade the `bluestore` based OSDs to use `bluestore-rdr`
- Backend store of the OSDs can not be overridden, so this update will require the OSDs to be replaced one by one.
- In order to start this osd migration, users need to patch the ceph cluster spec like below:

```yaml
storage:
  store:
    type: bluestore-rdr
    updateStore: yes-really-update-store
```

#### Replace OSD
- Operator reconciler will replace one OSD at a time.
- A config map will be used to store the list of OSDs to be replaced and the OSD being replaced currently.
- OSD replacement steps:

>   1. List out all OSDs where `osd-store:<osd store type>` does not match with `spec.storage.store.type`.

Author: not sure what happened here. Its showing roman numbers for the steps. I'll take a look.

Reviewer: Probably because it's a sub-bullet of the dashes. If you want to avoid them, you could make lines 89-91 just a normal paragraph without bullets.

*NOTE*:
- Once the OSDs are migrated to a new OSD store, say, `bluestore-rdr``, they won't be allowed to be migrated back to the legacy store (bluestore)

- Add a new label `osd-store:<osd store type>` to all the OSD pods.
- This label will help to identify the current backend store being used for the OSD and enable the operator to decide if the
  OSD should be migrated in case the user changes the backend store type in the spec (`spec.Storage.osdStore.type`).

### NEW CLUSTERS
- Currently the osd backend store is hardcoded to `bluestore` throughout the operator code.
- Add a new environment variable called `ROOK_OSD_STORE_TYPE` in the OSD prepare and OSD pods. This will contain the OSD store type. Use this environment variable to prepare and activate the cluster.

#### OSD Prepare
- The `ceph-volume prepare` command is updated to use backend store provided in the `spec.storage.osdStore`. If no value is provided for `spec.storage.osdStore` then default to `bluestore` backend.

>   - **OSD on disks**:

Reviewer 2: OSDs on PVC?

Author: The commands are same for both OSD on PVC and OSD on disks.  So removed the reference to `OSD on disks` here.

    - RAW MODE
      - `ceph-volume raw prepare --bluestore_rdr --data /dev/vda`

>     - LWM MODE

Reviewer 2: ?

```suggestion
    - LVM MODE
```

Author: done.

  3. Once the PG status is `active+clean`, pop an OSD entry from the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDList`. Update the `LastReplacedOSD` and `LastReplaceTimeStamp`
  4. Provide two new environment variables to the OSD prepare pod running on `OSDReplaceInfo.Node` in case of OSD on disks or `OSDReplaceInfo.Path` in case of OSD on PVCs
   - `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID`: OSD to be deleted.
   - `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_PATH`: The backing device or pvc claim of the OSD
  5. OSD prepare pod job will destroy the OSD based on the environment variables provided above. This process is mentioned in the `Destroy OSD`` steps below.
  6. Continue with the existing flow of creating and upgrading the OSD, with the exception of skipping the upgrade for all the OSDs that are currently present in the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDList`. Skipping update operation on the OSDs that need to be migrated is important because with OSDs on disks, the OSD prepared pod is updated if there is an update in the spec. This will update the osd store to `bluestore-rdr` in the spec without migrating the OSD. This will cause errors.
  7. Reconcile the operator and perform as same steps in the next reconcile.

> 

Reviewer 2: Nit to make spacing consistent between sections. There are 3 here but it looks like 2 elsewhere.

Author: Made it consistent with some other docs by using only single line spacing for all the section.

- Prepare the OSD with the new store type by using the same OSD ID. This is done by passing the OSD ID as `--osd-id` flag to `ceph-volume` command.

    ```
    ceph-volume lvm prepare --osd-id <OSD_ID> --data <OSD_PATH>
    ```

#### Manage OSD migration status

- OSD migration status will managed by `OSDReplaceConfig` API. This will be stored as the config map. For example:
``` yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:
  config: '{"OSDInprogress":{"id":0,"path":"/mnt/set1-data-045k6q","node":"minikube-m02"}'
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2023-07-18T14:42:29Z"
  name: osd-replace-config
  namespace: rook-ceph
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
    blockOwnerDeletion: true
    controller: true
    kind: CephCluster
    name: rook-ceph
    uid: e634abc3-39fa-4dd0-a015-753030e64f95
  resourceVersion: "3580"
  uid: 7b7d35d4-7807-4286-b185-3f8562cb3cbe
```
- This config map will have the `ownerReference` of cephCluster resource.

##### Ceph Cluster Status:

- Ceph cluster status would indicate the progress of the OSD migration.
- It will show the store type along with the number of OSDs that are using that store type.

> - Ceph cluster status should also be set to `Progressing` while migration is ongoing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ceph cluster `phase` should also be set to `Progressing` while migration is ongoing.
```

- The status `message` will have some useful information about OSDs that are pending migration.
  ``` yaml
  status:
   ceph:
      osd:   # new status setting indicating the progress of OSD migration
       storeType:
        bluestore: 3
        bluestore-rdr: 5
      capacity:

>       bytesAvailable: 19212857344

Reviewer: nit: I'd suggest removing the example status from this section that isn't directly related to the new osd status, so the reader can focus on what is new in the design

Author: removed the example status. Only keeping new OSD status.

**OSDReplaceConfig**: This will hold the current status/progress of the OSD replacement in the cluster.
  - **OSDList**:  List of OSDs that are yet to be replaced.
  - **IsPgHealth**: Whether Placement Groups are healthy or not. This is a boolean field.
  - **PgHealthMessage**: This will contain a detailed health message of the placement groups. For example: `active+clean`
  - **LastReplaceOSD**: This field will contain details of the OSD that was last replaced.
  - **LastReplaceTimeStamp**: Time at which the last OSD was replaced.
  - **StartTimeStamp**: Time at which the whole OSD replacement process was started. This will help users know how much time has elapsed since the first OSD was replaced.

#### Replace OSD :

Operator reconciler will perform following sequence of steps to replace an OSD:
  1. List out all the OSDs that need to be replaced. This list will contain OSDs that have `osd-store:<osd store type>` pod label not matching the osd store type provided in `spec.storage.osdStore.type`. This list will be stored in `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDList` and will be used a queue.

>   2. If the PG status is not `active+clean`, don't pop and OSD from the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDList`

Reviewer 2: I think we might want to have a step between 1 and 2 that is like: 
"If the CephCluster storage config does not allow replacing OSDs for updates, emit a warning event and error message in Rook's log, then proceed with standard (no replacement) OSD update logic"

Author: What situation will lead to - `CephCluster storage config does not allow replacing OSDs for updates`, 
other than PGs are not active due to last OSD replacement?

- Ceph cluster status should also be set to `Progressing` while `osd-replace-config` is available.
- The status `message` will have some useful information about OSDs that are pending migration.
  ``` yaml
  conditions:
    - lastHeartbeatTime: "2023-07-19T05:24:19Z"
      lastTransitionTime: "2023-07-19T05:21:30Z"
      message: Cluster created successfully
      reason: ClusterCreated
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    - lastHeartbeatTime: "2023-07-19T05:24:19Z"
      lastTransitionTime: "2023-07-19T05:24:19Z"
      message: '2 osds awaiting migration to "bluestore-rdr". PG Status: "cluster
        is not fully clean. PGs: [{StateName:undersized+peered Count:1}]"'
      reason: ClusterProgressing
      status: "True"
      type: Progressing
    message: '2 osds awaiting migration to "bluestore-rdr". PG Status: "cluster is
      not fully clean. PGs: [{StateName:undersized+peered Count:1}]"'
    observedGeneration: 3
    phase: Progressing
    state: Creating
    storage:
      deviceClasses:
      - name: hdd
    version:
      image: quay.io/guits/ceph-volume:bs-rdr
      version: 17.2.6-373
      ```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

## Planning

This feature is big. Going in stages will be best. Can break down stages:
* new OSDs (greenfield)
* existing OSDs on PVC without metadata devices
* existing OSDs on PVC with metadata devices
* existing node-based OSDs (harder because may have been set up using batch)

```

Author: added a new section for `Planning`.

	IsPgHealthy          bool            `json:"isPgHealthy"`
	OSDInProgress        *OSDReplaceInfo `json:"OSDInProgress"`
	StartTimeStamp       time.Time       `json:"startTimeStamp"`
}
```

**OSDReplaceInfo**: Represents an OSD that needs to be replaced
  - **ID**: OSD ID of the OSD to be replaced.
  - **Path**: Disk or pvc claim that the OSD is consuming.
  - **Node**: Node on which the OSD is running

**ReplaceQueue**: This is a queue implementation containing a list of OSDs to be replaced. It will support basic queue operations like push, pop, size etc.

**OSDReplaceConfig**: This will hold the current status/progress of the OSD replacement in the cluster.
  - **OSDs**:  List of OSDs that are yet to be replaced.
  - **IsPgHealth**: Whether Placement Groups are healthy or not. This is a boolean field.
  - **OSDInProgress**: Represents the OSDs for which the deployment is being deleted.
  - **StartTimeStamp**: Time at which the whole OSD replacement process was started. This will help users know how much time has elapsed since the first OSD was replaced.

#### Replace OSD

Operator reconciler will perform following sequence of steps to replace an OSD:

>   1. List out all the OSDs that need to be replaced. This list will contain OSDs that have `osd-store:<osd store type>` pod label not matching the osd store type provided in `spec.storage.store.type`. This list will be stored in `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDs`

Reviewer: Actually, do we even need to store the list of OSD IDs in a configmap? Every reconcile we can just query the OSD labels and then choose one of them to convert. Maybe the only thing we need to store in a configmap is the OSD in progress. Everything else is just internal implementation for the operator or osd prepare job.

Logging the list of OSD IDs in need of conversion would be helpful though in case the admin wants to see progress in detail besides the cluster CR status.

Reviewer: What if we add the list of OSDs in need of migration to the CephCluster status? Then we can keep the configmaps as an internal implementation detail and not try to use them as an API.

Author: I gave it another thought.  The list of pending OSDs might not be very useful information. A simple flag in the `status.ceph` in the `cephCluster` yaml will be more useful instead. 

For example: 
``` status:
    ceph:
      capacity:
        bytesAvailable: 32147042304
        bytesTotal: 32212254720
        bytesUsed: 65212416
        lastUpdated: "2023-08-07T08:01:36Z"
      details:
        OSD_SLOW_PING_TIME_BACK:
          message: Slow OSD heartbeats on back (longest 2080.270ms)
          severity: HEALTH_WARN
        OSD_SLOW_PING_TIME_FRONT:
          message: Slow OSD heartbeats on front (longest 2090.234ms)
          severity: HEALTH_WARN
      fsid: d6cbe2a9-1648-47fd-a5e8-5889596aa344
      health: HEALTH_WARN
      lastChanged: "2023-08-07T08:01:36Z"
      lastChecked: "2023-08-07T08:01:36Z"
      previousHealth: HEALTH_OK
      versions:
        mgr:
          ceph version 17.2.6-373-g5406f4b1 (5406f4b1729bf4f476338ad344cc86b126e0c5b3) quincy (stable): 1
        mon:
          ceph version 17.2.6-373-g5406f4b1 (5406f4b1729bf4f476338ad344cc86b126e0c5b3) quincy (stable): 3
        osd:
          ceph version 17.2.6-373-g5406f4b1 (5406f4b1729bf4f476338ad344cc86b126e0c5b3) quincy (stable): 3
        overall:
          ceph version 17.2.6-373-g5406f4b1 (5406f4b1729bf4f476338ad344cc86b126e0c5b3) quincy (stable): 7
     osdStoreMigration: <COMPLETED/INPROGRESS>
```

What do you think?

  2. If the PG status is not `active+clean`, don't replace any OSD.
  3. If the PG status is `active+clean`:
     - If `OSDInProgress` is not empty due to any error in the previous reconcile, then don't remove any new OSD from the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDs` and continue with the deletion of the OSD mentioned in `OSDInProgress`.
     - Else remove an OSD entry from the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDs` and assign it to `OSDInProgress`.
  4. Delete the OSD deployment

>   5. Provide a new environment variables to the OSD prepare pod running on `OSDReplaceInfo.Node` in case of OSD on disks or `OSDReplaceInfo.Path` in case of OSD on PVCs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  5. Create an OSD prepare job that will perform the replacement. A new environment variable is set on the OSD prepare pod:
```

      - `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID`: OSD to be deleted.
  6. OSD prepare pod job will destroy the OSD based on the environment variables provided above. This process is mentioned in the `Destroy OSD` steps below.
  7. Continue with the existing flow of creating and upgrading the OSD, with the exception of skipping the upgrade for all the OSDs that are currently present in the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDs`. Skipping update operation on the OSDs that need to be migrated is important because with OSDs on disks, the OSD prepared pod is updated if there is an update in the spec. This will update the osd store to `bluestore-rdr` in the spec without migrating the OSD. This will cause errors.

>   8. Once the destroy OSD pod is added back, reset `OSDInProgress` to nil. If there is any error during the OSD migration, then don't reset `OSDInProgress`.

Reviewer: If the OSDInProgress is the only thing in the configmap, we could just delete the configmap.

- Prepare the OSD using the same `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID` and path using following commands:

    ```
    ceph-volume lvm prepare --osd-id {ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID} --data {OSD_PATH}
    ```

#### Manage OSD migration status

- OSD migration status will managed by `OSDReplaceConfig` API. This will be stored as the config map. For example:
``` yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:
  config: '{"osdList":{"osds":[{"id":1,"path":"/mnt/set1-data-1qwdpk","node":"minikube-m03"},{"id":2,"path":"/mnt/set1-data-2c8h9k","node":"minikube-m04"}]},"isPgHealthy":true,"OSDInprogress":{"id":0,"path":"/mnt/set1-data-045k6q","node":"minikube-m02"},"startTimeStamp":"2023-07-18T14:41:33.180909077Z"}'
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2023-07-18T14:42:29Z"
  name: osd-replace-config
  namespace: rook-ceph
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
    blockOwnerDeletion: true
    controller: true
    kind: CephCluster
    name: rook-ceph
    uid: e634abc3-39fa-4dd0-a015-753030e64f95
  resourceVersion: "3580"
  uid: 7b7d35d4-7807-4286-b185-3f8562cb3cbe
```
- This config map will have the `ownerReference` of cephCluster resource.

##### Ceph Cluster Status:

> - Presence of this config map `osd-replace-config` will indicate that OSD migration is in progress.

Reviewer: If the replacement is in progress, maybe the osd reconcile loop can just update the cluster CR status directly, instead of using the configmap to store intermediate status.

- Add a new environment variable called `ROOK_OSD_STORE_TYPE` in the OSD prepare and OSD pods. This will contain the OSD store type. Use this environment variable to prepare and activate the OSDs.

#### OSD Prepare

- The `ceph-volume prepare` command is updated to use backend store provided in the `spec.storage.osdStore`. If no value is provided for `spec.storage.osdStore` then default to `bluestore` backend.

    - RAW MODE
        ```
        ceph-volume raw prepare <OSD_STORE_FLAG> --data /dev/vda
        ```

    - LVM MODE
      ```
      ceph-volume lvm prepare <OSD_STORE_FLAG> --data /dev/vda
      ```

#### OSD Create

- `OSD_STORE_FLAG` should use the value provided in the `spec.storage.osdStore`. If no values are provided by the user, then `OSD_STORE_FLAG` should default to `bluestore`
- `ceph-volume` commands should use the `OSD_STORE_FLAG` while activating the OSDs.

    - RAW MODE
      ```
      ceph-volume raw activate --device "$DEVICE" --no-systemd --no-tmpfs
      ```

    - LVM MODE
      ```
      ceph-volume lvm activate --no-systemd "$OSD_STORE_FLAG" "$OSD_ID" "$OSD_UUID"
      ```

> **NOTE**: ceph-volume `activate` command doesn't require `OSD_STORE_FLAG` to be passed as an argument. It auto detects the backend store that was used during the OSD `prepare`

Author: [Rook master](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/1cf207947c3ad9502fadd5cfdf39fc444c26be48/pkg/operator/ceph/cluster/osd/spec.go#L119) uses this flag for `activate` command as well. I can try testing it without this flag and then remove it if its not required.

> **NOTE**: ceph-volume `activate` command doesn't require `OSD_STORE_FLAG` to be passed as an argument. It auto detects the backend store that was used during the OSD `prepare`

Author: We can skip the flag during `lvm` activate.  More details [here](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/12381#issuecomment-1668916773)

### Existing OSDs

- After upgrading an existing rook ceph cluster to a version that supports `bluestore-rdr`, users can upgrade the `bluestore` based OSDs to use `bluestore-rdr`
- Backend store of the OSDs can not be overridden, so this update will require the OSDs to be replaced one by one.
- In order to start this osd migration, users need to patch the ceph cluster spec like below:

```yaml
storage:
  osdStore:
    type: bluestore-rdr
    updateStore: yes-really-update-store
```

#### API

```go
// OSDReplaceInfo represents an OSD that needs to replaced

> type OSDReplaceInfo struct {

Reviewer: Do we need this section in the design doc?

> type OSDReplaceInfo struct {

Author: removed API changes from the design doc since they related to internal logic.

> 	ID   int    `json:"id"`

Author: I think it will be useful to have the information such as `Node` in the config map. Would help users know what all nodes are pending.

> 	ID   int    `json:"id"`

Author: portable OSDs are only for OSDs on PVCs, right?

> 	ID   int    `json:"id"`

Reviewer: > portable OSDs are only for OSDs on PVCs, right?

Correct. Even for non-portable OSDs, not sure the host name is needed here. The configmaps aren't generally used as status by users, so my theory is to just use it for only what's necessary for internal implementation.

	Path string `json:"path"`
	Node string `json:"node"`
}

// ReplaceQueue contains the list of OSDs to be replaced one at a time
type ReplaceQueue struct {
	OSDs []OSDReplaceInfo
}

// OSDReplaceConfig contains the status of the OSD replacement
type OSDReplaceConfig struct {

> 	OSDList              *ReplaceQueue   `json:"osdList,omitempty"`

Author: When the main operator reconcile is about the end, we can query this config map again. If `OSDList` is empty, we do nothing and reconcile ends. If OSDList is not empty and `isPGHealthy` is not false, we can requeue with timeout.

> 	OSDList              *ReplaceQueue   `json:"osdList,omitempty"`

Author: Other applications using rook operator, might also get some detailed information about the ongoing status of the migration process by looking at these properties stored in the config map. 
We can store the status in the configmap in real time, but that won't give a very detailed about the progress of the migration. 

The idea here is to store these properties in the config map. Other apps (like ODF operator) can use it and even rook can use it after end of the main reconcile to determine if we should continue with the reconcile with a timeout or just return without requeueing.

	IsPgHealthy          bool            `json:"isPgHealthy,omitempty"`
	PgHealthMessage      string          `json:"pgHealthMessage,omitempty"`

> 	LastReplacedOSD      *OSDReplaceInfo `json:"lastReplacedOSD,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Instead the last replaced OSD, I'm thinking we need to store the OSDInProgress. The sequence would be:
- Remove an OSD from the list and set it to OSDInProgress
- The operator starts the replacement progress
- After the OSD is replaced and its OSD deployment is running again, reset the OSDInProgress to blank. This can be reset as soon as the deployment is running and before the PGs are active+clean.

Reviewer: This way if the operator is restarted in the middle of a replace, it can attempt to restart the replacement, for example if the osd prepare job was never created or failed.

Author: @BlaineEXE also suggested something similar. But he suggested it as a new option along with the `LastReplaceOSD`.  The LastReplaceOSD and LastReplaceOSDTimeStamp might be useful when an pgs are taking a lot of time to be `active+clean`.  Users can know which OSD was last replaced and the time elapsed since then.

Author: So the update flow can be like: 
- Remove an OSD from the list and set it to OSDInProgress
- The operator starts the replacement progress
- After the OSD is replaced and its OSD deployment is running again, reset the OSDInProgress to blank. (This can be reset as soon as the deployment is running and before the PGs are active+clean)
- Update the `LastReplaceOSD` to `OSDInProgress` and `LastReplacedOSDTimestamp` to current time.

Suggestions?

Author: marking this as resolved since the design doc is updated now.

  - **LastReplaceOSD**: This field will contain details of the OSD that was last replaced.
  - **LastReplaceTimeStamp**: Time at which the last OSD was replaced.
  - **StartTimeStamp**: Time at which the whole OSD replacement process was started. This will help users know how much time has elapsed since the first OSD was replaced.

#### Replace OSD :

Operator reconciler will perform following sequence of steps to replace an OSD:
  1. List out all the OSDs that need to be replaced. This list will contain OSDs that have `osd-store:<osd store type>` pod label not matching the osd store type provided in `spec.storage.osdStore.type`. This list will be stored in `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDList` and will be used a queue.
  2. If the PG status is not `active+clean`, don't pop any OSD from the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDList`
  3. Once the PG status is `active+clean`, pop an OSD entry from the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDList`. Update the `LastReplacedOSD` and `LastReplaceTimeStamp`
  4. Provide two new environment variables to the OSD prepare pod running on `OSDReplaceInfo.Node` in case of OSD on disks or `OSDReplaceInfo.Path` in case of OSD on PVCs
      - `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID`: OSD to be deleted.

>       - `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_PATH`: The backing device or pvc claim of the OSD

Author: We don't need the `path`.  You are right. `ceph-volume lvm/raw list` can fetch this path. We already have helper methods for this in OSD prepare.

  5. OSD prepare pod job will destroy the OSD based on the environment variables provided above. This process is mentioned in the `Destroy OSD` steps below.

>   6. Continue with the existing flow of creating and upgrading the OSD, with the exception of skipping the upgrade for all the OSDs that are currently present in the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDList`. Skipping update operation on the OSDs that need to be migrated is important because with OSDs on disks, the OSD prepared pod is updated if there is an update in the spec. This will update the osd store to `bluestore-rdr` in the spec without migrating the OSD. This will cause errors.

Author: We pass the osd store type (`bluestore` or `bluestore-rdr`) to OSD prepare job (as env) and to the OSD pod (as a label). 
So if update the spec from `osdstore.type = bluestore` to `osdstore.type=bluestore-rdr`, we don't want the OSD pods to be updated.

>   7. Reconcile the operator and perform as same steps in the next reconcile.

Author: A goroutine might not work here.  The reconcile thread will update the OSD pod and add the new `osd-store` label before the goroutine. So it will not be able to detect the OSDs that need migration. 

Currently we are replacing as the part of same reconcile.

#### Destroy OSD

OSD prepare pod job will perform OSD deletion using following steps.
- It checks for `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID` and `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_PATH` arguments.

> - Delete the OSD deployment based on the `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID`

Author: during the POC, I was able to delete the OSD deployment both via the operator and osd prepare pod without any issues.  So deleting OSD deployment within OSD prepare pod also worked for me.

> - Delete the OSD deployment based on the `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID`

Reviewer: We have seen in some environments that the RWO volumes are allowed to be mounted, and in others they are blocked, so we will hit this issue in some environments. This way, the osd prepare job also doesn't need RBAC for deployments, since the operator already has access.

- Destroy the OSD based on the `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID`

    ```
    ceph osd destroy {ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID} --yes-i-really-mean-it
    ```

> - Once the OSD is destroyed, wip out the backing device represented by `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_PATH` This removes all the data of the device and metadata regarding previous backend store (bluestore)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once the OSD is destroyed, wipe the backing device represented by `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_PATH`. This removes all data and metadata on the device.
```

> - Once the device is cleaned up, its ready to be used again for OSD. Ensure that same OSD ID is used to prepare the OSD again. This cane be done by passing the OSD ID as `--osd-id` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once the device is wiped, prepare the OSD with the new store type. Use the same OSD ID to prepare the OSD again. This is done by passing the `--osd-id` flag to `ceph-volume`.
```

- Prepare the OSD using the same `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID` and `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_PATH` using following commands:

    ```
    ceph-volume lvm prepare --osd-id {ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID} --data {ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_PATH}
    ```

#### Manage OSD migration status

- OSD migration status will managed by `OSDReplaceConfig` API. This will be stored as the config map. For example:

> ``` yaml oc get cm -n rook-ceph osd-replace-config -o yaml

Reviewer: Need a separate comment block for the `kubectl get cm` command.
```suggestion
```yaml 
```

      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    - lastHeartbeatTime: "2023-07-19T05:24:19Z"
      lastTransitionTime: "2023-07-19T05:24:19Z"
      message: '2 osds awaiting migration to "bluestore-rdr". PG Status: "cluster
        is not fully clean. PGs: [{StateName:undersized+peered Count:1}]"'
      reason: ClusterProgressing
      status: "True"
      type: Progressing
    message: '2 osds awaiting migration to "bluestore-rdr". PG Status: "cluster is
      not fully clean. PGs: [{StateName:undersized+peered Count:1}]"'
    observedGeneration: 3
    phase: Progressing
    state: Creating
    storage:
      deviceClasses:
      - name: hdd
    version:
      image: quay.io/guits/ceph-volume:bs-rdr
      version: 17.2.6-373
      ```

## Planning

These changes require a significant developemnt effort to migrate existing OSDs to use new backend store. So it will be divided into following stages:
* New OSDs (greenfield).
* Migrating existing OSDs on PVC without metadata devices.
* Migrating existing OSDs on PVC with metadata devices.
* Existing node-based OSDs (multiple OSDs are created at once using ceph volume batch which adds to additional complications).

## Open Questions

> - Deleting OSDs when we have multiple OSDs per disk.

Reviewer: For now, let's not support replacing OSDs with multiple OSDs per disk or batch mode for non-PVC OSDs. When needed later, this can be addressed.

## MOTIVATION:

- Ceph uses BlueStore as a special-purpose storage back end designed specifically for managing data on disk for Ceph OSD workloads. Ceph team is working on improving this backend storage that will help in significantly improving the performance, especially in disaster recovery scenarios. This new OSD backend is known as `bluestore-rdr`. In the future, other backends will also need to be supported, such as `seastore`.
- To support any new and improved storage backend, the existing OSD needs to be destroyed, disks should be wiped out and new OSD should be created using the latest storage backend.

## GOALS

- Newly provisioned clusters should be able to use the specific storage backend while creating OSDs.
- Existing clusters should be able to migrate the OSDs to use a specific storage backend, without downtime and without risking data loss.

## PROPOSAL

- Add a new field called `spec.Storage.osdStore` in the ceph cluster yaml.

```yaml
storage:

>   osdStore:

Reviewer: Actually, I see in types.go that we already have a `store` with a `type` setting. So we can use the existing type and just add the new `updateStore` setting to the [OSDStore struct](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/master/pkg/apis/ceph.rook.io/v1/types.go#L2595)?

Author: Yes, that's part of the same effort. The existing `OSDStore` that's there in master was for the Greenfield case. We had decided to keep the same design PR for both Greenfield and Brownfield scenarios.

Reviewer: Oh of course, good to know it's for the same effort. :) 
Then I believe the yaml example here and in below paragraphs need to be renamed, right? osdStore --> store

Author: ah right. My bad. Its `store`.  Update the design doc.

Author: marking it as resolved.

**OSDReplaceConfig**: This will hold the current status/progress of the OSD replacement in the cluster.
  - **OSDs**:  List of OSDs that are yet to be replaced.
  - **IsPgHealth**: Whether Placement Groups are healthy or not. This is a boolean field.
  - **PgHealthMessage**: This will contain a detailed health message of the placement groups. For example: `active+clean`
  - **OSDInProgress**: Respresents the OSDs for which the deployment is being deleted.
  - **LastReplacedOSD**: This field will contain details of the OSD that was last replaced.
  - **LastReplacedTimeStamp**: Time at which the last OSD was replaced.
  - **StartTimeStamp**: Time at which the whole OSD replacement process was started. This will help users know how much time has elapsed since the first OSD was replaced.

#### Replace OSD :

Operator reconciler will perform following sequence of steps to replace an OSD:
  1. List out all the OSDs that need to be replaced. This list will contain OSDs that have `osd-store:<osd store type>` pod label not matching the osd store type provided in `spec.storage.osdStore.type`. This list will be stored in `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDs` and will be used a queue.

>   2. If the PG status is not `active+clean`, don't replace any OSD.

Reviewer: From #12612 we likely need a common helper for determining health status from PGs, if it is safe to proceed with OSDs.

Author: we have a [helper](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/52c9cfea9fe3c7e30f044040d468399f008379d5/pkg/daemon/ceph/client/status.go#L220) to determine this

  3. Once the PG status is `active+clean`:
   - If `OSDInProgress` is not empty due to any error in the previous reconcile, then don't remove any new OSD from the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDs` and continue with the deletion of the OSD mentioned in `OSDInProgress`.
   - Else remove an OSD entry from the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDs` and assign it to `OSDInProgress`
  4. Provide a new environment variables to the OSD prepare pod running on `OSDReplaceInfo.Node` in case of OSD on disks or `OSDReplaceInfo.Path` in case of OSD on PVCs
      - `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID`: OSD to be deleted.

>   5. OSD prepare pod job will destroy the OSD based on the environment variables provided above. This process is mentioned in the `Destroy OSD` steps below.

Reviewer: Per separate discussion, the operator should destroy the OSD

Author: updated the design doc.

Reviewer: nit: How about making it a new top-level numbered bullet? I overlooked it at the end of that sub-bullet.

Author: Added the osd deployment as a new numbered bullet.

>   6. Continue with the existing flow of creating and upgrading the OSD, with the exception of skipping the upgrade for all the OSDs that are currently present in the `OSDReplaceConfig.OSDs`. Skipping update operation on the OSDs that need to be migrated is important because with OSDs on disks, the OSD prepared pod is updated if there is an update in the spec. This will update the osd store to `bluestore-rdr` in the spec without migrating the OSD. This will cause errors.

Reviewer: As discussed, we always need to preserve the label for the type of store the OSD was created with. For example, if the migration is aborted, some OSDs may even remain of different types. This may also allow us to reconcile all OSDs, **except** only to skip the single OSD that is in progress.

Author: This is addressed in [comment below](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/12381#discussion_r1284724277). Now we should be able to upgrade OSDs that need migration (expect the currently being migrated). Marking this comment as resolved and following up on [below comment.](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/12381#discussion_r1284724277)

>   7. Once the destroy OSD pod is added back, update `LastReplacedOSD` with `OSDInProgress` and `LastReplacedTimeStamp` with current time. Reset `OSDInProgress` to nil. If there is any error during the OSD migration, then don't reset `OSDInProgress`.

Reviewer: Why do we need to track the last replaced OSD? We could just look in the operator logs if that info is needed.

  8. Reconcile the operator and perform as same steps in the next reconcile.

#### Destroy OSD

OSD prepare pod job will perform OSD deletion using following steps.
- It checks for `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID` arguments.
- Use `ceph volume list` to fetch the OSD path.
- Delete the OSD deployment based on the `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID`
- Destroy the OSD based on the `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID`

    ```
    ceph osd destroy {ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID} --yes-i-really-mean-it
    ```

- Once the OSD is destroyed, wipe the backing device. This removes all the data on the device.
- Once the device is wiped, prepare the OSD with the new store type. Use the same OSD ID to prepare the OSD again. This is done by passing the OSD ID as `--osd-id` flag to `ceph-volume`.
- Prepare the OSD using the same `ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID` and path using following commands:

    ```
    ceph-volume lvm prepare --osd-id {ROOK_REPLACE_OSD_ID} --data {OSD_PATH}
    ```

#### Manage OSD migration status

- OSD migration status will managed by `OSDReplaceConfig` API. This will be stored as the config map. For example:
``` yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:

>   config: '{"osdList":{"osds":[{"id":1,"path":"/mnt/set1-data-1qwdpk","node":"minikube-m03"},{"id":2,"path":"/mnt/set1-data-2c8h9k","node":"minikube-m04"}]},"isPgHealthy":true,"pgHealthMessage":"all

Reviewer: It still feels like we only need two items in this configmap: list of OSD IDs still to migrate, and the osdInProgress

Author: removed `LastReplacedOSD` and `LastReplacedOSDTimestamp` and `PGHealthMessage` from the config.

  -

- Example:
```yaml
storage:
  osdStore:
    type: bluestore_rdr
    updateStore: yes-really-update-store
```
- New deployments will use this `osdStore.type` while creating the OSDs.
- If the user wants to change the `osdStore.type` field for an existing cluster, then they need to provide `spec.Storage.osdStore.updateStore:yes-really-update-store` in order to migrate the existing osds to use update osdStore.

### NEW DEPLOYMENTS

#### OSD Prepare
- `ceph-volume prepare` command should be updated to use backend store provided in the `spec.storage.osdStore`. If no value is provided for `spec.storage.osdStore` then default to `bluestore` backend.

  - **OSD on disks**:
    - RAW MODE
      - `ceph-volume lvm prepare --bluestore_rdr ...`
    - LWM MODE
      - `ceph-volume raw prepare --bluestore_rdr ...`
  - **OSD on PVCs**:
    -

#### OSD Create
- `OSD_STORE_FLAG` should use the value provided in the `spec.storage.osdStore`. If no values are provided by the user, then `OSD_STORE_FLAG` should default to `bluestore`
- `ceph-volume` commands should use the `OSD_STORE_FLAG` while activating the OSDs.
  - **OSD on disks**:
    - RAW MODE

>     `ceph-volume raw activate "$OSD_STORE_FLAG" --device "$DEVICE" --no-systemd --no-tmpfs`

Reviewer: The activate command requires the store type? I would hope the OSD activate could see on disk already what type it needs to work with. This seems risky if we pass the wrong store type to an existing OSD, instead of just passing the flag when provisioning a new OSD.

Author: yes. The activate command in [ceph-volume](https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/d20abd4aa739426ab23e9b4af530cf9fb6181da6/pkg/daemon/ceph/osd/daemon.go#L87-L88) is using the `storeType`

Author: Yes. We can skip OSD store flag in the activate command for both `lvm` and `raw` mode. More details [here](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/12381#issuecomment-1668916773)
